
Page 1
WALK THROUGH HISTORY OF GREEN SCHOONHOVEN Landscaping: Park Leonard Springer, monumental and other greenery. Schoonhoven in the 13 century at the mouth of the river The Zevender (a bog stream of natural origin) in Lek, to the border of Holland and Utrecht. e We walk from Belvedere restaurant left on the dike. From here we have a beautiful view on the River Lek with its flood plains. The river Lek was before 1000 an insignificant stream, but then become increasingly important. Lek has along its banks strips of clay on peat deposited. Schoonhoven at over 1 meter. Formerly overgrown with many upright timber, including oaks. Inland it went into a lighter vegetation including alder and birch. A marsh area at high tide flooded the surrounding land under water and at low water ran through the gullies and the river back to swallow. The River Lek, the lower reaches of the Rhine below the influence of the tide from the sea. The Lopiker and krimpenerwaard a vast peat (peat and clay on peat land) area until the 10 e century only sporadically lived. Below from the west rather than a systematic exploration. The land is drained by straight locks and lots and made suitable for agriculture and animal husbandry. The subdivision structure is today still see how and when the mining has place. The oldest reclamations are located along the major rivers. Around 1200, the Lopiker Krimpenerwaard and largely developed. Low embankments across the river course were local settlements against runoff. In the 13 e century, the peat has been sounded far more difficult to grow cereals is. The peat streams are dammed whatsoever. The cities in the 12 e and 13 e Century City to grant rights and privileges for the aristocracy always hoped to be insured of their (financial) support. Possession of municipal laws enabled the city walls, moats and walls to strengthen, which also served as protection against
Page 2
river water. From 14 e century continuous dike rings. Within Dijks urban expansion were realized. The outer dike lands were intended for development of ports, shipping companies and related industries. From 17 e century is also involved in the open water area of the city. Schoonhoven is like a typical damstad Gorinchem, Newport, Rotterdam and Amsterdam. The dam was built as part of a previously created dike system to protect the country against the backdrop of high water. They acted as the center of several transmission lines and urban activities. The peat river Zevender formed using a flat bottom with the hinterland, while the river provide access to larger river boats. Drainage, water supply, inland fisheries and defense. The dynamics of the city is given by a network of waterways. Schematic representation of a settlement around a dam. From the dike we walk down to the Green Singel. We are now at the former 17th-century ramparts. Here it is still free of fire visible. Through the "Water Tower" (chalet style, 1901), we walk to the Oude Singel. This gebiedje still characterizes the openness between the densely populated medieval city and the later 17th century ramparts of the old canal. This is the border of the walled medieval city of Schoonhoven in the countryside. The City walls are from the mid 14th century, built in a short time. From all 5 cardinal gave access to the city gates. We walk past where the 'Velle Gate ", an ancient land gate, stood the old city. Havenstraat we walk north to the part where the old city wall has been restored. This is also evident that between the old city wall and moat past several city gardens located. Now there is a public park built. You can imagine that coming from Gouda, people here used to be a magnificent view of the canal, the gardens and behind the wall and the old city has had. This is described in the surviving "Schoonhovense Arcadia" or morning walk to Schoonhoven and through the city in 1777. We continue through the Weather Gang Koestraat left onto the bridge on the mediaeval the canal and turn right Kruispoort Street.
Page 3
At the end of this street was once the Kruispoort, one of the five city gates. Here we pass the Wilhelmina tree, planted in 1898. It is one of the three Orange Trees Schoonhoven rich. On Target Square, the tree whose Juliana Unfortunately, the fence has been lost. On the corner of the Old Port is the Beatrix Boom. Via the old bridge of Trompertswal we walk in the park. Under King William III in 1874 the Fortress was established, which the cities the river area were given official permission for their oppressive fortifications to break, except those parts that had a water feature. Water and walls were no longer the enemy at bay. The space used by the degradation arose, was initially used to parks to build. modeled of the English landscape gardens. This park was established in 1918 to one of the 17th century bastions built by the famous garden architect Leonard Springer. A booklet on the history of the park is included in the guide available for E 5 .= This is also the area where in the early 13th century Jan van der Lede possible fortified house had stood surrounded by a small settlement at the Prested Zevender river. "Sconhouen" was on the border of the influence of the County of Holland and the Sticht Utrecht. In 1280 Count Floris V of Holland pledged to Nicolaes Cats of the property consisting of Schoonhoven and port dish. There is existence of an urban settlement with a sheriff and board of aldermen. Also economic activity there. There are (years)-held markets. The Doelenplein was formerly called the "Plaetse" marktveld the front of the castle. In the 15 e century castle with four corner towers of a castle. During the town fire of 1518 was Castle and seriously damaged in 1540 by order of Charles V aborted. Target House was built in 1779 behind an older Target House 1618. It is the original headquarters of the militia. In the tympanum is a figure of St. George (patron saint of shooters) are visible with the dragon. Behind the Target House In the 16 e and 17 e century a formidable tree stood "the tree", an urban entertainment twelve persons in whose crown made of wood planks were take place. The militia had twelve directors (directors). Now we walk through the new canal to the studio of the sculptor Jan van Ipenburg. The two surviving bastions surrounding the canal are located from clearly visible. The studio is located behind the teahouse from the likely 18 e century. Formerly surrounded by ornamental gardens and orchards, was the "outside" of the affluent residents of the city .. They had a beautiful view of the town and the open countryside with views of the villages Cabauw, and Polsbroek Haastrecht. Happy
Page 4
has a large part of the outskirts are still a green appearance. This reveal the identity of the town 1000 years has grown somewhat protected. We walk further and go to the bridge over the Scheeren Luwe Lopiker Wetering, what used to Zevender river was. The bridge is the oldest maps of the area was already visible and an Schoonhoven and important connection between Lopik. The plane trees along its Wetering more than 50 years old. The road to the north was the main route for carts and carriages. The south side towpath mainly for the many goods that are flat-bottomed transported to and from the city. On the side of the canal near the inn where we was previously passed by a Overtoom. Here the boats on the ramparts lifted to ditch the butter. Transit of goods made it possible to the river Vlist, and the city Haastrecht. Through the canal to the Crescent in Willige Langerak to come De Halve Maan is a part of the 17 e century fortification, which on the map Tirion out of 1744 is clearly visible. The History of the glory Willige Langerak "goes back to 1272 as Wouter Goye of Lord of Langdon's. The church with the cemeteries, built on a dark, are therefore already mentioned. Willige and Langerak Langerak (south of the Lek) than hear still together. The allotment is almost aligned and both share borders eastern western and accurate in each other. Possibly the primeval northern Lek earlier along or south along the Willige Langerak Langerak Overlekse walked the splitting a result of a subsequent levee failure. Perhaps the river in the early Ages no separation but rather a proper road link between the two settlements. Langerak The name comes from the straight portion of the Lek spot the long leg. In the Middle Ages the border (ecclesiastical and civil) between Schoonhoven and Willfully Langerak the river Zevender. Willige Langerak came under administrative control of the Bishop of Utrecht.
Page 5
Willige Langerak late 12 e century Schoonhoven and Voluntary Langerak late 13 e century We walk along the Boulevard de Montigny church to the dike. Originally called the road from the church to the center of Schoonhoven west out of town the Kerkstraat. After digging the canal at mid- 14 e century, this connection has been lost and replaced by the Gate on the border Willig Short of Lekdijk and Dike. The name refers to the last Montigny Avenue craft lady of the manor: Diocese of Paulina van Vliet (1840-1923) married Lefevre Johan Jacob de Montigny, who until 1921 had a hunting lodge in use. The house is built or rebuilt in part at the end of 1917 e century. On the cemetery near the church is the grave yard of the lords of the manor Langerak willing to visit. We walk west on the dike to the Wal Schoonhoven. North of the dam is a masonry dam or "bear", a remnant of the 17 e century defenses and watershed between the canal and the river Lek. Outside the on the south side is a natuurgebiedje with natural popping of willow and ash. On The Orange stronghold, is the southernmost bastion of public cemeteries. While until the end of the 16 e Langer century Field Gate has been run we medieval town in again. Ship via Haven Makers, Wal Cat and we walk back to hotel and restaurant Belvedere. Initially, this port area outside the city. At the end of 1916 e century to the south of the city made an earth wall. A new spring gate (1601) is south of the old gate was built. Makers to Ship Harbour (now protected within the city limits) industrial activity occurs in the form of shipyards, a pot or pan bakery and later a carpet weaving. We now walk under beautiful 200 years old plane trees. It is unfortunate that the new construction only half the original port is preserved. We also see the "goldsmith tower", aka "Tower on the hole of the Harbour ', alias Bartholomew Tower. Originally built in the 14 e century during the great walls Schoonhoven. The tower closed not only for access to the Port and Harbour off, covered but also the two southern banks of the city on either side of the hole of the Port. Near the port in 1588 a woman "cat", an earthen platform which guns can be made, constructed.
Page 6
Copper engraving of Guicciardni (1582)
