
Page 1
This surprising collection of maps and drawings was for the museum visitor in Haastrecht largely invisible understandable, since she was kept behind closed doors in wall cabinets. 1 From 2003 until 2008 was part of a basic registration project's total museum collection described, digitized and an inventory number. There- was still in the rolled form preserved collection of topographic maps A closer look and it was decided to to examine ways to material elsewhere included. There is contacted the Regional Mid-Holland, because in an archive the cards to the public and consulted. Moreover, the sensitive material are in optimal optimal conditions. Uniquely For the first time in the history of Diocese Museum van Vliet, an deelcollec tion elsewhere classified. In preparation for transfer to The comprehensive collection of the Regional described. In addition to his cards sorted by topic, and some cards combined. In the Diocese of Vliet Museum continues to everything as it was public. In the library remains framed Hoogheemraadschaps- map of the Krimpenerwaard in 1818 by John Leupenius 2 decorate a wall (Fig. 1), while two general maps of Lopikerwaard from the 1770 and 1771 and a Map of Rhine Water Board other panels improve from 1746. At the end of the 19 e century, the collection of topographical CAL cards together by the marriage of Paulina Maria Diocese van Vliet (1840-1923) Jacob and Johan le Fèvre de Montigny (1840-1881). There was a collection of some 350 objects, which varied is subject, but also in manner of manufacture. There are manuscript maps, hand drawn in ink and watercolors, engravings, whether or not colored, and there are color lithographs. The collection Diocese van Vliet-Le Fèvre de Montigny mainly from utensils rather than from collectors and includes maps and drawings from the end of the 18 e until the end of the 19 e century acquired. The collection rests on a largely on two pillars. On the one side, members of the family Diocese van Vliet important administrative functions in Krimpenerwaard and were actively as Mayor of Haastrecht. Also were members of the family land- ters and they had as individuals essential to good maps of the region. On the other hand, there are cards presence zig who served as study material for military and cartographic purposes, by members of the family Le Fèvre Montigny these functions exercised. John Jacob was the grandson of Gilles John le Fèvre the Montigny (1765-1821), Colonel of the Engineer Genius, and especially inherited from his grandfather, John Jacob special maps, often in manus- cript, which important events in the history of the Low Countries record. A lot of cards to find out why and by whom they are made ​​of and what The historical maps from the collection of the Museum Foundation Diocese van Vliet Haastrecht were March 2010 long-term loan taken by the Regional Mid-Holland Gouda. A selection of maps and drawings from the collection Diocese van Vliet-de Montigny Le Fèvre was from April 15 to end of May 2010 in an exhibition called Regional. (A message about Adri den Farmer appeared in the section Companies and Services in Geo-Info 2010-5, p. 49.) The cartographic collection Diocese van Vliet-de Montigny Le Fèvre Fig. 1. The library of museum Diocese van Vliet Haastrecht with wall to the high-Heme munity council Krimpenerwaard card from 1818. Framed card remained in museum Esther Verkaik, art historian and Elien Voerman, museum box Geo-Info 2011-3 19
Page 2
they are used. This makes the collection of an important family documents. The composition of the collection set was decided to set a global categorizing into four main sections: hoogheemraadschaps, polders and river maps, military maps, ontwerptekenin- gene and foreign cards. This classification is not very strict and in particular the group Military maps have much overlap with other cards. Hoogheemraadschaps, river and polder maps Besides the above mentioned high heme board shelf cards are important rich river and polder maps from the middle and late 18 e century in the collection. The polder maps printed copper engraving include areas around the Ener-Shrink worth Zuidplas, polders around hazer forests but also of Haarlemmermeer, polder and the reclaimed area Zijpe in North Holland. Some cards are updated with ink or with characters, parcel numbers, names, or other (to) drawings. In addition to these cards there is a Haastrecht series of cadastral maps, with or without surrounding polders. These cards are very directly related the possessions of the Diocese of family Vliet. These printed cards which in ink annotations have been made, but Also manuscript maps, also frequently annotated with data as parcel numbers and dimensions. Probably these cards collected sign or used by the various Diocese of generations who had seats in The water board of the shrink- nerwaard, and because of their administrative as Mayor. The office of was the mayor of Haastrecht 18 the and 19 the century, followed by almost father to son. The so-called river maps in the Collection Diocese van Vliet-Le Fèvre the Montigny give some mere course of the rivers, run again, but many cards are military functions the landscape display. Since the rivers and the use of water inextricably linked with the military defense of Lower country, it is clear that the collection ment Diocese van Vliet both types of cards present. Indeed, the regulation of the river system and the construction of the Water lines with associated flood- Plans were for both the military in the family and for the administrative officials and landowners important. Within the area of the shrink- nerwaard to stay here is a map of the River Lek highlighted the by Melchior Bolstra, surveyor Rhineland from 1731. This kopergra- reserved for fire in 1765 was published in seven newspapers. The collection is one to each put one. 3 Bolstra Lek was commissioned to map it, because there was great need to the river and to adjust other measures to the river more manageable. In this period, developed with Bolstra Johan Lulofs (inspector of the rivers province of Holland from 1754) adaptation plans in the river bed to the river safer and navigable account. Of the maps above were drawn, are also copies collection Diocese van Vliet-Le Fèvre the Montigny present. The 18 e century, a number as copper engraving printed maps of the rivers that are connected to the Leak, and the problems surrounding the management of these rivers it Fig. 3. Casteel and plan of the city with his killing of Philippine polders' (JJ?) Le Fèvre the Montigny, signed. Manuscript map in pencil and ink on paper, colored, 37.9 x 71.7 cm. (Hxw) BVV inventory number 8695. Cards were for family utensils Fig. 2. "Map of the River Lek with its flood plains north and south embankments of the river Merwede Shrink down the chimney from above Hagestein Vianen, Melchior Bolstra, publisher Tirion, 1751-1765 Copper engraving on paper, 52.0 x 354.0 cm. (Hxw), inventory number BVV 8731. 20 Geo-Info 2011-3
Page 3
depicted, the proposed upstream proposed changes to the rivers around Channel in the Pannerdens Bijland- worth more downstream the adjustment tions on the Oude Maas. 4 Besides a copper engraving print maps, several manuscript maps of river courses in Shrink nerwaard, but also from outlets of rivers in South Holland and Zeeland, Mark Rivers and Dintelhaven, and the Stoutersgat Middlesbrough on the embankment at about Flak kee. Maps of the Philipinnepolder in Zeeland Flanders (Fig. 3), the IJssel and the Polder near Kampen Dronten are very detailed and colored drawings riviervak ​​of not only but also polders adjacent to ditches and cor- hearing (inundation) locks and dams. On the other manuscript maps is often the course of the river in pen signed with blue colored inundation areas, and often information on currents and river depths. The second half of 19 e century "The Water Map of the Nederland'in collection site. This is a map series color lithography with next part cards in the Netherlands statistics appear, on political issues as location, boundaries and areas of polders, groundwater levels and summaries of altitude. This series was performed given by the Ordnance Survey Equipment The Hague from 1865-1891. Military Cards In the collection Diocese van Vliet-Le Fèvre de Montigny are special manuscript maps that give insight into the work of the military cartographer. This is particularly the work of le GJ Fèvre de Montigny (1765-1821) very impressive. Like his father, Captain John Nicholas engineer Le Fèvre de Montigny, was the work of John Gilles as a military engineer closely with that of the cartographer. 5 In collection Diocese van Vliet-Le Fèvre the Montigny, a number of cards dealt certainty be attributed to John Nicholas writing, particularly in areas Overijssel and Zeeland. Gilles Johan- nes not only his work as military present cartographer, but also from his material functions for the Land Department kept from him. 6 Raged in 1799 a brief but intense struggle on Dutch territory. A British-Russian invasion with the aim of French domination in the Batavian Republic Republic to end landed on the coast North-Holland. Colonel CRT Kraijenhoff (1758-1840) led the Batavian troops John and Gilles de Montigny Le Fèvre was commander of a strengthening in the intersection Zanddijk (Hondsbossche) Dike and Dreamer. He made ​​the situ- ation for the coast on the eve of landing a detailed military card, including two versions in manuscript Diocese in the collection are van Vliet kept 7 (Fig. 4). The map of the Le Fèvre Montigny was then incorporated into the Historical publication consideration of war on the territory of Batavian Republic in 1799 by Cornelis Kraijenhoff in 1832. 8 Of the area in England where this battle is going on in 1799, the Zijper polder, a number of engravings presence zig in the collection of the Diocese of Vliet through January Dirksz surveyor. Zoutman. He made ​​an extensive polder map of the Zijpe, in three different formats appeared. 9 Bis-collection stupid van Vliet, two small-Zoutman maps from 1664 and three loose-Large Zoutman cards available from 1665 (Fig. 5) Fig. 4. "Caart der Situation in England of Sand Dike in Duynen present, along North Sea, where the respective Military Dispositien of English (bijstanne Landing on the 27th August 1799) and the Batavian troops between the size and Keeten Klyne, "by Lieutenant Engineer Colonel GJ de Montigny Le Fèvre signed, 1799. Manuscript map in ink and watercolor on paper, 50.2 x 93.2 cm. (Hxw), inventory number BVV 8714. Fig. 5. "Afbeeldingh of Zype, January Dircksz. Zoutman, 1664. Copper engraving on paper, 25.3 x 40.2 cm. (H * w), inventory number BVV 8597. Geo-Info 2011-3 21
Page 4
It is plausible that these small-Zoutman Card by Le Fèvre de Montigny and study was used. Thus the lakes' behind the zwanenwater'vlak off the map at Figure 5 in watercolor subscribed and adjustments in the dike system installed. Another map of Le Fèvre de Montigny in copper engraving was done that the "Camp d'Utrecht'uit approximately 1804 (Fig. 6). This map of the area between Zeist and Austerlitz with the layout of the camp of the Batavian and French armies, is well- different stages in manuscript and in print Diocese in the collection of the Vliet-Le Fèvre Montigny present. Top left of the map in an oval cartouche off the pyramid- image that was built by the soldiers. Design Drawings water works and fortifications Additional drawings on the topographic maps are drawings of repellent- know and fortifications. This is a remarkable collection of diverse projects, in manuscript, and with the agreement that The military projects or drawings of locks and dams, which are also military functions (Fig. 7). The drawings are of far-out projects different parts of the country. A large refers to the number of drawings area around the North and West Brabant waterline and Zeeland areas such as the polders around Terneuzen and Axel. These drawings of fortifications locks and include in Steenbergen Bergen op Zoom and the fort Steel Courts at Geertruidenberg (Fig. 8). There is also a well developed series of drawings for locks and dams on the Wrist Beek, an offshoot of the IJssel near Zutphen. These probably fit in inun- Dati system to protect the city, and come from the archives of le GJ Fèvre de Montigny (Fig. 9). Finally, there various sketches and drawings of ammunition depots, dijkverstevigin- gene, so that no direct bridges title or caption is found. Foreign cards The foreign maps from the collection Diocese van Vliet-de Montigny Le Fevre are less varied in nature than the cards that the parts of the Kingdom concern. Most of the foreign foreign cards printed, usually in stone pressure, and dates from the 19 e century. Over Half of the approximately one hundred foreign Cards concerns territory of the modern Indonesia. Special is the almost complete series topo- graphic maps of the Dutch East Indies, a residency in a paper cover, and published by Ordnance Survey at The Hague from 1857-1877 (Fig. 10). Fig. 6. "Carte du Camp d'Utrecht commande par le Marmont and general manager, Le Fèvre the Monti GJ GNY, circa 1804. Manuscript map in ink on paper and watercolor, 63.5 x 76.8 cm. (Hxw) inventarisnum- mer BVV 8560. Fig. 7. "Spring Door Ebbdeur which has been '. Manuscript Drawing in ink and watercolor on paper, 23.8 x 30.1 cm. (Hxw), inventory number BVV 8682. Fig. 8. "Second Project to defense of the new Seawall at Sluys in Rijgersbos. Manuscript drawing in ink and watercolor on paper, 38.7 x 30.6 cm. (Hxw), inventory number BVV 8643. Fig. 9. "Second Project to defense of the new Seawall at Sluys in Rijgersbos. Manuscript drawing in ink and watercolor on paper, 38.7 x 30.6 cm. (Hxw), inventory number BVV 8643. Gilles J. involved in French Land Fig. 10. "Topographic Map of Residence Pekalongan ', published by the Topographical Hague facility after 1863. Color lithograph on paper, 59.8 x 74.2 cm. (Hxw) inventarisnum- mer BVV 9260. 22 Geo-Info 2011-3
Page 5
There is also some written by FW Junghuhn (1809-1864). 10 From this Westphalia-based explorer cartographer and brought the geography, geological ogy and nature of Java and Batta Countries on Sumatra map. It is plausible that these cards by John Jacob Le Fèvre the Montigny (1840-1881) were purchased. He married Pauline in 1869 Diocese van Vliet and after the death of his father Marcellus Diocese van Vliet (1806-1877) he took his job as mayor of Haastrecht about. 11 John Jacob was trained as a marine navigation officer followed. He made ​​in 1855 - 1856 and in 1857-1859 two-year voyages on the frigate "Admiral of the Wash- senaer. In 1859 he sailed to the West Indies The transport ship "The Heroine". 12 Not only maps in the collection is his interest for these areas to manifest but also in the extensive library in museum Diocese van Vliet present. The map collection contains well- various maps that have direct relation- am with pieces from the archive Diocese van Vliet, particularly from the estate GJ Le Fèvre and JJ de Montigny le Fèvre de Montigny. Extensive research to this store and the connection with the cards and the book collection will be in the future insight into the cards and drawings now in the Regional Mid-Holland kept. Summary A surprising collection of maps and drawings was for the Diocese of museum visitor Vliet in Haastrecht largely invisible understandable, since he was kept behind closed doors in wall cabinets. From 2003 to 2008 was part of a basic registration project The entire museum described digitized digitalis degree and an inventory number. It was still in the rolled form preserved collection of maps and a closer look it was decided that the opportunities to under- find the material elsewhere in shipment gene. There has contacted the Regional Mid-Holland, because the cards in an archive to the public and consulted. Moreover, the sensitive material here stored in optimal conditions. This publication of the collection is a result of The loan legislation is written. Summary A surprising collection of maps and drawings Has Been largely invisible for visitors to the Diocese van Vliet Museum in the town of Haastrecht, Because it was stored behind locked doors. From 2003 Until 2008 the full Museum Collection Has Been described and digitised. Shaft part of the project, the collection Rolled maps or Has Been Closely researched and it was Decided to Investigate the option thesis maps to store elsewhere. As a result, the maps have leg handed to the Regional Central Archive for Holland, Because here the Maps are available for reference to the public. Further More, the maps are stored vulnerable under the most-favored Circumstances. This article marks the loan from the Museum to the Regional Archive. 4 Van den Brink, 1998: 127. 5 AJ van der Aa, Biographical Dictionary the Netherlands, containing levensbeschrij- suggestions of such persons, who are on any way in our country have made famous, Haarlem 1852-1878, Part 6 pp. 75-76. 6 MD Lammertse, "Colonel-Engineer of Genie GJ le Fèvre de Montigny, "in: Our Army, 35 (December 1951) 12, p. 21-22. Le Fèvre the Montigny was closely involved with the new tax on verponding 'in 1806, set. After the annexation of the Netherlands France, Gilles John on December 17 1810 appointed as the Battalion Chief of Engineers' and in 1811 he became the first administrator for the land, retaining its rank in the French army. 7 Schilstra JJ, "The invasion of the British and the Russians in North Holland in 1799 and "Hondsbossche, in: Sixth edition of 'friends the Hondsbossche, 1986, p. 14. 8 This publication is available in the library Diocese of museum library van Vliet, inventories, risnummer BVV 7921. 9 J. Belonje, "Mapping of Zijpe, in: Zijpe History Sheets, 1986, p. 13. 10 Inventory number 7851-7860. Jung- huhn are also a number of publications in Library of Museum of the Diocese Vliet present. 11 CH de Jonge, Guide of the Museum of Foundation Diocese van Vliet, nd, p. 4. 12 C. van Someren, Paulina, the Diocese last van Vliet, Gouda 2001, p. 37. 1 For information and opening times: www.bisdomvanvliet.nl. 2 For this card, see: J. Leupenius, Map the Water Board of the Energy-Shrink worth 1683, introduction by CR Schoute, Alphen aan den Rijn 1980. In the Diocese of collection Vliet-de Montigny Le Fèvre are in total of four versions of this card: one-losbla lived from 1755 version, a loose-leaf and a bound version from 1792 and a framed and colored copy from 1818. 3 P. van den Brink, 'In a store order. The Dutch state and water rivierkartografie care attendance, 1725-1754, Alphen aan den Rijn 1998, p. 118. Street View lost? Geo-Info 2011-3 23
