Paulina sits down to begin her autobiography. Aims to keep alive the family name and history as a means of holding
onto her social position posthumously. Overtly recognises that involved parties will now be dead so unaffected by
an honest account. But, does she realise that society will have changed? 

Alternate 'talking head' Paulina who is striking a public pose in her writing with experiential flashbacks to
events at strategic places in her narrative. 

Principal characters:

Marcellus: marries under pressure for an heir. Reflects on past family glories,
difficult times and his desire for grander things/achievements again. Competitive, political & acquisitive streaks
in this mild-seeming man. A period of relative stability after Belgian Revolt triggers hope for a prosperous and peaceful future.
Political concerns: 1936 floods and Harlemermeer project so water management issues to the fore, first railway
line Amsterdam to Haarlem being built to bring workers and materials.

Maria: Widowed in 1836, from Dordrecht and merchant class. Artistic, good manger, strong - and good breeder. 3 yrs older than Marcellus.
Also brings wealth he craves due to husband's will. Already has three children. Engages Paulina in the running of house and estates.

Johan: Johan snr, Petronella, & toddler Gilles (born 1837)at Nieuwe Tonge. Middle class by contrast and from different
geographical part of S. Holland (swampy island). Johan snr widowed ?by malaria married again in 1836. Keeping up appearances
in higher circles. Role of church as Johan snr a minister. Life at sea then rich through investments.

Places:

Haastrecht: its history as an important place where Vlist joins Hollandse Ijssel, centre for justice
and site of jail. 1618 town hall. 13th C Dutch Reformed ? Church and old castle site. Haastrecht water mill of unique brick construction,
Beneden, Boezem and Bonrepas mills before pumping station. It is only rarely - as at Haastrecht - that a tower mill with
a stage is used as a drainage mill. 

Nieuwe Tonge and Goeree-Overflakkee island: Distinguished church. Oranje molen.

Gouda: Johan living in a hotel there when meet/decide to marry.

Utrecht: reception here. An important city, nearby yet Haastrecht not in Utrecht province. Uncle Otto makes himself
a presence there and taken different family name.

Den Haag: Live for first few years of marriage. Fashionable city whose style influences life at Haastrecht and the design of the new hosue.

Den Helder: Johan's sea faring connections there.

Rotterdam and Amsterdam: business foci for the men.

